Malaria, one of the world’s most prominent public health challenges, is on the move. A new study based on previous predictions of where malaria in children may appear suggests that climate change is redrawing the map of malaria’s spread across the African continent. The data, reported July 29 in Nature , show a gradual shift from West and Central Africa toward the eastern and southern regions, consistent with global warming. Increased temperatures may mean a more hostile environment for disease-carrying mosquitoes in the West and Central regions and a more favorable climate in the eastern and southern regions, says Romaric Odoulami, a climatologist at the University of Cape Town in South Africa. “Malaria transmission and mosquitoes’ life cycle are very sensitive to temperature,” he says. This represents a shift in the map of this ancient disease . Malaria has historically been most prevalent in West and Central Africa, where temperatures are suitable for both the parasite that causes the disease (the genus Plasmodium ) and the mosquitoes that carry it (the genus Anopheles ). Previous laboratory studies have shown that mosquito-based transmission of malaria peaks at 25° Celsius, while it drops off below 19° C and above 34° C. High-elevation regions of East Africa and coastal southern Africa have been cold enough to fend off significant malaria transmission, centering the disease in hotbeds. including Nigeria and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. But a deep dive into blood sample datasets from sub-Saharan Africa spanning over a century reveals that this story is changing. Odoulami and colleagues used the data to build a computer model linking childhood malaria prevalence to temperature and precipitation, then compared their findings with a hypothetical model without climate change. The team found that from 1901 to 2014, climate change has likely caused a net 0.5 percent increase in malaria transmission across sub-Saharan Africa — one excess case for every 1,000 children — with a much greater increase in East and southern Africa.
